Add support for SSL in MQTT Bridge (#223)
strimzi/proposals: 142-add-support-to-ssl-mqtt-bridge.md

> # Add SSL/TLS support to MQTT Bridge

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Add SSL/TLS encryption support to MQTT Bridge
```

Maybe this way it would be a bit more clear what we focus on here?

This proposal is to add support for SSL/TLS to the MQTT Bridge component of Strimzi.

> This would allow MQTT clients to connect to the MQTT Bridge over an encrypted MQTT over TLS connection.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This would allow MQTT clients to connect to the MQTT Bridge over an TLS encrypted connection.
```

## Current situation

No SSL/TLS support is currently available in the MQTT Bridge.
This means that MQTT clients connect to the MQTT Bridge over an unencrypted connection.
This can expose MQTT traffic to interception or tampering when clients connect over untrusted networks.

## Motivation

The motivation for adding SSL/TLS support to the MQTT Bridge is to enhance the transport security of MQTT Bridge deployments.
Since a common use case for the MQTT Bridge is to connect IoT devices to Kafka, MQTT traffic might pass through networks where encryption is required.
Supporting MQTT over TLS allows users to protect data in transit without changing the MQTT protocol version or the bridge mapping behavior.

## Proposal

> This proposal adds support for MQTT over TLS by allowing users to configure a server certificate and private key for the MQTT listener.

Reviewer 2: We should say explicitly that, like the HTTP bridge, it supports certificate and key in PEM format and not PKCS12 for example.

When SSL/TLS is configured, the MQTT Bridge will add a Netty SSL handler before the MQTT decoder and encoder in the server pipeline.

This proposal is limited to SSL/TLS encryption for MQTT client connections.
It does not change MQTT topic handling, Kafka mapping behavior, or MQTT client session semantics.

## Technical implementation

### Configuration

We will begin by adding new configuration options to the MQTT Bridge.
These options will allow users to enable secure MQTT connections and specify the necessary SSL/TLS configurations.
We will not add a separate TLS port configuration.

> The MQTT Bridge will continue to use a single MQTT listener, and MQTT over TLS will use the existing MQTT server port configuration with the standard MQTT over TLS port, 8883.

Reviewer 3: So the bridge would only allow either all connections over TLS or all plaintext, it won't support both TLS and non-TLS connections simultaneously, correct? If so, is that something maybe worth mentioning explicitly here? 

Is the purpose of doing this to simplify the iimplementation? If so, maybe it is a potential "future work" item we could add at the end of the proposal if it is not going to be supported initially. WDYT?

Reviewer 2: I would stick with plan or encrypted but not supporting them at the same time. It's the same behavior as HTTP bridge and I would stick with consistency.

It will look something like this:

> ```application.properties

Reviewer 2: As already mentioned above we should have a dedicated `mqtt.server.ssl.enable` configuration property.

mqtt.server.port=8883
mqtt.server.ssl.certificate.location=path/to/server-cert.pem
mqtt.server.ssl.key.location=path/to/server-key.pem
mqtt.server.ssl.certificate=--BEGIN CERTIFICATE--\n...\n--END CERTIFICATE--

> mqtt.server.ssl.key=--BEGIN PRIVATE KEY--\n...\n--END PRIVATE KEY--

Reviewer 3: I imagine we would want some configurations for a truststore as well right? (assuming we want to support MTLS)

Reviewer: It is just an encryption. Truststore would be needed for mTLS authentication only. Or are there some internal connections between instances of the MQTT bridge etc.? I do not think so, or?

Reviewer 3: > It is just an encryption.

Ah yes, you are right, I forgot this proposal is just for encryption. The mTLS can be addressed in the future proposal for authentication.

@antonio-pedro99 ignore this thread!

Reviewer 2: Yes let's focus on encryption only as I requested. We'll move with authN and authZ (by also adding mTLS) in the future.

```

> Note: All configuration options that support both inline and file-based values are mutually exclusive. 
Inline values take precedence over file-based values.

Optionally, we can also support the configuration for specifying the protocols and cipher suites:

```application.properties
mqtt.server.ssl.enabled.protocols=TLSv1.2,TLSv1.3

> mqtt.server.ssl.enabled.ciphers=TLS_AES_128_GCM_SHA256,TLS_AES_256_GCM_SHA384

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
mqtt.server.ssl.enabled.cipher.suites=TLS_AES_128_GCM_SHA256,TLS_AES_256_GCM_SHA384
```
I would follow the same parameter name pattern as the HTTP bridge.

> Optionally, we can also support the configuration for specifying the protocols and cipher suites:
> 
> ```application.properties
> mqtt.server.ssl.enabled.protocols=TLSv1.2,TLSv1.3
> mqtt.server.ssl.enabled.ciphers=TLS_AES_128_GCM_SHA256,TLS_AES_256_GCM_SHA384
> ```

Reviewer: You mean ... these configurations will be supported, but they will be optional only for the user I guess?

```suggestion
We will also support the configuration for specifying the enabled protocols and cipher suites.
These options will be optional for the users and when not set, the Netty / JRE default values will be used.

```application.properties
mqtt.server.ssl.enabled.protocols=TLSv1.2,TLSv1.3
mqtt.server.ssl.enabled.ciphers=TLS_AES_128_GCM_SHA256,TLS_AES_256_GCM_SHA384
```
```

> > If these options are not specified, the MQTT Bridge will use the default SSL/TLS configurations provided by the Java runtime.

Reviewer 2: Let's do the same as the bridge which defaults to `TLSv1.2,TLSv1.3`

Author: maybe I did not get, but it was already mentioned

`mqtt.server.ssl.enabled.protocols=TLSv1.2,TLSv1.3`

Reviewer 2: The sentence says it defaults to the ones from Java runtime which is not true for the bridge which defines:

```java
/** Default SSL enabled protocols to be used when SSL is enabled */
public static final String DEFAULT_SSL_ENABLED_PROTOCOLS = "TLSv1.2,TLSv1.3";
```

So in the bridge we are using the above as default which may or may not match the default ones from Java runtime (depending on the runtime).

> After this, we are going to create a new configuration wrapper class to load and manage these new config options, say `MqttSslConfig`.

Reviewer: If you mention things such as class names etc., it should be clear that that would be the name used. Or you should not mention the name at all and leave it for the PR. E.g.

```suggestion
A new class named `MqttSslConfig` will be used as a new configuration wrapper class to load and manage these new config options.
```

The way you fraze sounds like it is one of the many options, but that is not how the proposal should sound.

This class will then be part of the existing `MqttConfig`.

> The SSL/TLS state will be derived from the configured MQTT server port rather than from a separate enable flag; for example, `MqttSslConfig.isEnabled()` can return true when the configured port is 8883.

Reviewer 3: I understand that 8883 is the standardized port for MQTT over TLS but what happens when a user configures TLS on a another port? What if `mqtt.server.port=8883` but TLS is not configured? Would it be more reliable to use the the `mqtt.server.ssl.*` to check whether TLS is enabled?

Reviewer 2: I agree with Kyle we should try to follow as much as possible the same approach we have in the HTTP bridge so that people using the two will be comfortable. So yes, I think that a flag like `mqtt.server.ssl.enable=true` would be beneficial (as HTTP bridge has `http.ssl.enable=true`).

Author: > I agree with Kyle we should try to follow as much as possible the same approach we have in the HTTP bridge so that people using the two will be comfortable. So yes, I think that a flag like `mqtt.server.ssl.enable=true` would be beneficial (as HTTP bridge has `http.ssl.enable=true`).

the initial proposal already included these, config keys, I guess there were a [comment](https://github.com/strimzi/proposals/pull/223#discussion_r3490647427) suggesting to match the config with the HTTP bridge, and I have changed the keys to do so. 
But yes, I agree with both of you.
 
@katheris does it makes sense?

Author: @katheris @ppatierno @kyguy my take is to leave the `mqtt.server.port=8883` but add others `mqtt.server.ssl.`, like `mqtt.server.ssl.enable=true`

> It would look something like this:

Reviewer: Again, the proposal needs to be exact in the things it covers. So it should not looks `something like this`.

```suggestion
It would look like this:
```

```java
public class MqttConfig extends AbstractConfig {
    // existing config options...

    private final MqttSslConfig sslConfig;

    // constructor and methods...

    /**
     * Gets the SSL/TLS configuration for the MQTT Bridge.
     * @return the SSL/TLS configuration for the MQTT Bridge
     */
    public MqttSslConfig getSslConfig() {
        return sslConfig;
    }

    // other methods...
}
```

### Handling SSL/TLS in the server

To handle SSL/TLS connections, we will need to add the Netty SSL handler to the pipeline of the server.
This will require us to modify the existing `MqttServerInitializer` class to include the new handler.

> The final look of the `MqttServerInitializer` class will be something like this:

Reviewer: Same as above ... leave out the `something`.

    private final MqttServerHandler mqttServerHandler;
    private final int decoderMaxBytesInMessage;
    private final MqttSslConfig sslConfig;
    
    // add SSL config to the constructor
    public MqttServerInitializer(..., MqttSslConfig sslConfig) {
        // existing initialization logic...
        this.sslConfig = sslConfig;
    }

    @Override
    protected void initChannel(SocketChannel ch) {

        if (sslConfig.isEnabled()) {
            SslContext sslContext = // logic to create SSL context using the provided SSL/TLS configurations

            ch.pipeline().addLast("ssl", sslContext.newHandler(ch.alloc()));
        }

        ch.pipeline().addLast("decoder", new MqttDecoder(decoderMaxBytesInMessage));
        ch.pipeline().addLast("encoder", MqttEncoder.INSTANCE);
        ch.pipeline().addLast("handler", this.mqttServerHandler);
    }
}
``` 

Thankfully, Netty provides APIs to easily add SSL/TLS support, so we can leverage those APIs without having to implement the SSL/TLS logic from scratch. 

We will introduce a new component to encapsulate the logic for creating the Netty `SslContext` before adding the SSL handler to the pipeline.

> This component will look something like this:

Reviewer: Same as above ... I will not repeat this comment anymore. But please fix it in other places where you use this as well.

```java
public class MqttSslContextProvider {
    private final MqttSslConfig sslConfig;

    public MqttSslContextProvider(MqttSslConfig sslConfig) {
        this.sslConfig = sslConfig;
    }

    /**
     * Creates an SSL context based on the provided SSL configuration.
     */
    public SslContext createSslContext() {
        return SslContextBuilder.forServer(createKeyManagerFactory())
        .build();
    }

    /**
     * Creates the KeyManagerFactory based on the provided keystore configuration.
     */
    private KeyManagerFactory createKeyManagerFactory() {
        // logic to create KeyManagerFactory using the provided keystore configuration
    }
}
```

Our `MqttServerInitializer` will then use this `MqttSslContextProvider` to create the SSL context and add the SSL handler to the pipeline.
It would look something like this:

```java
 @Override
    protected void initChannel(SocketChannel ch) {
        if (sslConfig.isEnabled()) {
            MqttSslContextProvider sslContextProvider = new MqttSslContextProvider(sslConfig);

>             SslContext sslContext = sslContextProvider.createSslContext();

Reviewer 3: Do we need to call `createSslContext()` for every new client connection? Couldn't we call this once in `MqttServerInitializer` and reuse it?

Author: Yes, this is an interesting take, this is a left over from the initial proposal where clients would also need to identify themselves using a cert, mTLS.

            ch.pipeline().addLast("ssl", sslContext.newHandler(ch.alloc()));
        }

       // existing pipeline initialization logic...
    }
```

## Testing

We will need to implement both unit and integration tests to verify the functionality of SSL/TLS support in the MQTT Bridge.

We can make use of the Netty `EmbeddedChannel` to test the server pipeline initialization in isolation.
This will allow us to verify that the SSL handler is added before the MQTT decoder when SSL/TLS is configured.
Integration tests should verify that MQTT clients can connect successfully over TLS using the configured server certificate and key.

## Affected/not affected projects

> This proposal will primarily affect the MQTT Bridge component of Strimzi.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This proposal will affect only the MQTT Bridge component of Strimzi.
```

I don't think it will affect anything else, or?
